
Traitement multilingue de textes / Multilingual Text Processing
Centre de recherche en technologies numériques / Digital Technologies Research Centre
Conseil national de recherches Canada / National Research Council Canada
Copyright 2004-2018, Sa Majesté la Reine du Chef du Canada
Copyright 2004-2018, Her Majesty in Right of Canada


                       PortageLive Server Deployment

Before you start, please make sure you have read the "PortageLive Manual"
section of the PortageII User Manual under doc/user-manual.html.

Option 1: deploy to an existing physical or virtual server.

OS requirement: We typically use RedHat or CentOS, and have tested PortageLive
on versions 6 and 7. RH5 is no longer supported.

Application requirements - install through yum:
 - apache
 - mod_ssl
 - php 5.4 or more recent
 - php-soap

Other software requirements:
 - Install the latest Python 2.7.x using Miniconda2 as described in INSTALL at
   the root of this CD.
 - Install Perl (5.10 or more recent) and its packages as described in INSTALL.

PortageII itself and its files:
 - Follow instructions in the PortageLive Manual and sibling directories
   ../bin for PortageII software; ../www for PortageII web layout; and
   ../models and the framework for trained PortageII models.

Post installation
 - Read through application-post-install-script and manually perform steps
   3.1, 3.4, 3.5, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9
 - Read through first-boot-script and manually perform steps 4.1, 4.2, 4.3,
   4.4, makeing sure to "export LC_ALL=C" in your shell before doing so:
   although PortageII is generally compatible with any locale, this setup
   script is not!
 - The script subsequent-boot-script is required each time the IP address
   changes. If your server get a dynamic IP address assigned using DHCP, we
   recommend making sure this script is run each time the machine boots up.
   See "Static or dynamic IP?" in ../www/README for more details.


Option 2: Virtual Appliance creation

When we first created PortageLive, the intention was to deploy it as a virtual
appliance that could be easily replicated in a cloud setting. The PLiveVA.pdf
document explains how to create such a virtual appliance, but it has not been
update for several years. We keep it here for reference on the VA creation
methodology, but if you create a VA, you should adapt it with the current
instructions provided above in Option 1.

The scripts and files contained in this directory are samples you can manually
cut-and-paste into the VMWare Studio interface, if you chose to use VMWare
Studio.
